=encoding UTF8

=head1 NAME

rback - a generic, local, rsync-based, backup and restore script

=head1 SYNOPSIS

rback [B<-r> I<repository>] [B<-R> I<reponew>] [B<-i> I<file>] [B<-e> I<file>] [B<-I>] [B<-E>] [B<-C>] [B<-c> I<folder>] [B<-s> I<folder>] [B<-d> I<folder>] [B<-x> I<execute-type>] [B<-j>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<rback> is a generic backup and restore script.  B<rback> wraps common functions of B<rsync>(1) to aggregate backup necessities.  B<rback> defines:

=over

=item 1. The copy options.

=item 2. The I<source> and I<destination> directories.

=item 3. The I<file>, I<folders>... to I<include> or I<exclude>.

=back

B<rback> is repository-based to allow for multiple backup types (like full system backups, configurations...), and is only for local backups (i.e. the same computer that it resides on).  Additionaly, B<rback> includes a I<diff> method for working with text files.

=head1 OPTIONS

Repositories:

=over 4

=item B<-r> I<repository>, B<--repo>=I<repository>

Defines to rback which repository to use.  This option is required with all options except B<-R>, B<--Reponew>.  If erroneously entered, valid repositories are displayed.

=item B<-R> I<reponew>, B<--Reponew>=I<reponew>

Creates a new repository with name I<reponew> and exits.  A valid repository name is a single word containing alpha-numeric and underscore characters.

=back

Filelists:

=over 4

=item B<-i> I<file>, B<--include>=I<file>

Add a I<file>, I<folder>... to the include file.

=item B<-e> I<file>, B<--exclude>=I<file>

Add a I<file>, I<folder>... to the exclude file.

=back

Configurations:

=over 4

=item B<-I>, B<--Incedit>

Include file edit.

=item B<-E>, B<--Excedit>

Exclude file edit (wildcards allowed).

=item B<-C>, B<--Cfgedit>

Configuration file edit.

=back

Overrides:

=over 4

=item B<-c> I<folder>, B<--confdir>=I<folder>

Configuration directory define (this is necessary, for example, when backing up or restoring from a LiveCD).

=item B<-s> I<folder>, B<--srcdir>=I<folder>

Source directory define (overriding configuration file value).

=item B<-d> I<folder>, B<--dstdir>=I<folder>

Destination directory define (overriding configuration file value).

=back

Execute:

=over 4

=item B<-x> I<execute-type>, B<--xecute>=I<execute-type>

Execute type: I<backup>, I<restore>, or I<diff>.

=item B<-j>, B<--justdo>

Execute without confirmation a I<backup>, I<restore>, or I<diff>.

=back

=head1 CONFIGURATION

The configuration is created when the first repository is created.  The configuration file location is at F<~/.config/rback/config> and can be edited with C<rback -C>.

B<host=> is the prefix of the backup name (see B<bckname=> below).  A desireable B<host> name is a short description of the computer name, around four letters.  The environmental variable HOSTNAME here can be used; however, when using a non-root filesystem (e.g. a LiveCD for a restore) the HOSTNAME variable will differ.

B<date=> uses the conventional Year-Month-Day (%Y-%m-%d) format C<date +%F>.  This format is recommended for organizational listing purposes.

B<bckname=> is what the backup directory will be named.  By default the format is: F<host_YYYY-MM-DD_repo>.

Repository directories will need to be defined for each repository.  The directory variables are added to the configuration when the repository is created.  The directories are as follows:

=over 4

=item * B<$host>_B<$repo>_B<bsrc> = backup source directory

=item * B<$host>_B<$repo>_B<bdsp> = backup destination parent directory

=item * B<$host>_B<$repo>_B<rsrp> = restore source parent directory

=item * B<$host>_B<$repo>_B<rdst> = restore destination directory

=back

The backup source directory (B<bsrc>) should list the root directory ("F</>").  B<rback> records the full path (absolute path) of files to I<include> or I<exclude> so therefore the backup source directory should always be the root directory ("F</>").

The backup destination parent directory (B<bdsp>) is the directory that will contain the destination directory.  The "destination" directory will be: B<bdsp>/B<$bckname>/.

The B<rsrp> directory is the parent directory for a restore.  B<rback> on I<restore> or I<diff> will ask for which directory to use as the source directory from the parent directory.  Because restores are typically done from a "Live" medium (like a LiveCD) a B<rsrp> directory may look like: F</mnt/sdb1>.

The restore destination directory (B<rdst>) may look like: F</mnt/sda1>.

=head1 EXAMPLES

Add a repository:

B<    rback --Reponew linxconf>
    reponewcreatd: "linxconf"
    reponewcreatd: Edit config. to define backup/restore directories.

Add a file to the repository:

B<    rback --repo linxconf --include /etc/fstab>
    include-added: /etc/fstab

Add multiple files (require quotes and a non-special charactered path [see B<BUGS>]):

B<    rback --repo linxconf --include "/etc/pacman.conf ../../.vimrc...">
    include-added: /etc/pacman.conf
    ...

A backup can now be done by doing:

B<    rback --repo linxconf --xecute=backup>
    srcdirexistnt: /
    dstdircreated: /mnt/Backup/amiga_YYYY-MM-DD_linxconf
    Exec. backup?: y
        239.31K  97%  419.01kB/s    0:00:10 (xfr#41, to-chk=20/70) 

A restore will look like this (from a LiveCD, config. dir. defined):

B<    srcmnt=/mnt/sdb1/amiga_YYYY-MM-DD_linxconf/>
E<32>E<32>E<32>E<32>B<$srcmnt/usr/bin/./rback --repo linxconf --xecute restore \>
E<32>E<32>E<32>E<32>E<32>E<32>B<-c $srcmnt/home/user/.config/rback>
    conf-alternat: sourced
    Select restore source directory:
    1) /mnt/sdb1/amiga_YYYY-MM-10_linxconf
    2) /mnt/sdb1/amiga_YYYY-MM-12_linxconf
    #? 

Source directory and destination directory can be defined if not wanting to edit the configuration:

B<    rback --repo linxconf --srcdir=/mnt/sdb1/amiga... -d /mnt/sda1>

=head1 ROOTLIVE BACKUP

A backup is generally done from an external media source (non-root filesystem) like a LiveCD.  This is good discretion because some temporary files that exist on a "rootlive" media should not be put on a backup.  Other files to consider are: storage devices that are mounted, and files that a program/user may alter during a backup.  Backing up a "rootlive" media is possible with these considerations.

B<rback> comes with an I<exclude> list of temporary file locations and typical non-system mounts.  Copy or link F<host_linxfull_exc.txt> to I<host>_I<repo>_exc.txt in the configuration directory.  Warning: though this method has be tested successfully please use at your own risk.

=head1 DIFF RESTORE

B<rback> can also be used to differentiate files.  This method can be useful after a re-install to update-diff configurations.  When the "B<--xecute> I<diff>" method is choosen, the source directory files will be compared to the destination directory files.  By default B<rback> uses B<vimdiff>(1) so rback essentially launches a command like this:

B<    vimdiff> F</mnt/sdb1/amiga-YYYY-MM-DD-linxconf/etc/fstab> \
E<32>E<32>E<32>E<32>E<32>E<32>F</mnt/sda1/etc/fstab>.

B<rback> processes the files and: bypasses them when the files match; bypasses when the source file is absent; calls diff when the files differentiate; or calls diff when the destination file is non-existent (as some configuration files are manually built).

=head1 BUGS

=over 4

=item I<Note>: Error log.

If there as an error on a backup/restore, the error log location will be displayed.

=item I<Note>: B<rback> forces sudo use.

Though not every backup or restore may require superuser access, to realisticly test every file before every backup/restore is unrealistic; its requirement is therefore necessary.

=item I<Note>: Progress bar may not work.

Older versions of B<rsync>(1) may not have this function yet.  Authors version is 3.1.1.

=item I<Note>: Incremental backups not really considered.

While I<--delete-during> is set in the B<rsync> options this option works only if I<--include> listings are directories.  I.e. if a file is taken out of the include list it will remain in the source directory.  If one can remember, they can set the date to C<$(date +%Y-%m)> for example and do monthly incremental backups if they leave only directories in the include list.

=item I<Bug>: B<--include> and B<--exclude> options cannot except multiple files.

Except for entering non-wildcarded filepaths, and quoting multiple files (see example above), I have yet to find a way to do this.  This is one of the limitations of B<getopt>(1).  Eventually I might switch to B<getopts>(1) (which I believe can do multiple arguments L<http://tinyurl.com/oepyaxx>) and ditch long options.

=item I<Bug>: Options can be accidentally repeated.

B<rback> parses command line options and processes them in a pre-defined order therefore overwriting repeated options.  My scripting knowledge has yet to learn of a way around this.  It would be nice to add an error if an option gets repeated (except for B<--include> and B<--exclude> that is).

=item I<Todo>: B<--include> and B<--exclude> additions from non-root filesystem

Adding files to the include or exclude file from a non-root filesystem cannot correctly be done.  Eventually an option may be added.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<rsync>(1), B<vim>(1).

=head1 AUTHOR

Todd Partridge E<lt>toddrpartridge@gmail.comE<gt>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

License GPLv3: GNU GPL version 3 or later L<http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>.

